**Meta Data Name**: 2018 Good Samariton law variables, part of the Policy dataset  
**Last Modified**: Jan 7th, 2021
**Author**: Qinyun Lin  

### Data Location: 
PS04 - Good Samariton law variables at the state level. Files can be found [here](https://github.com/GeoDaCenter/opioid-policy-scan/tree/master/Policy_Scan/data_final).
* PS04_S  

### Data Source(s) Description:  
Variables were obtained from RAND-USC Schaeffer Opioid Policy Tools and Information Center. [2021]. OPTIC-Vetted Good Samaritan Policy Data. Obtained from https://www.rand.org/health-care/centers/optic/resources/datasets.html on Jan 7th, 2021. Raw data is downloaded in the folder of data_raw, named as "WEB_GSL.xlsx". 

### Description of Data Processing: 
The following variables were included from the source data:
1. Any Good Samaritan Law starting date;
2. Good Samaritan Law protecting arrest starting date;
3. Any Good Samaritan Law fraction;
4. Good Samaritan Law protecting arrest fraction.

Fractions are calculated based on the number of months out of 12 that a law is effective. A law is considered effective for a given month if a law becomes effective by the 7th for January, or if a law becomes effective by the 3rd for February – December.

### Key Variable and Definitions:
| Variable | Variable ID in .csv | Description |
|:---------|:--------------------|:------------|
| Any Good Samaritan Law starting date | AnyGSLdt | Date (DMY) any type of Good Samaritan law is effective |
| Good Samaritan Law protecting arrest starting date | GSLArrdt | Date (DMY) Good Samaritan law that provides protection from arrest for controlled substance possession laws is effective |
| Any Good Samaritan Law fraction | AnyGSLfr | Fraction of year any type of Good Samaritan law is effective |
| Good Samaritan Law protecting arrest fraction | GSLArrfr | Fraction of year that Good Samaritan law that provides protection from arrest for controlled substance possession laws is effective. |

### Data Limitations:
N/A.

### Comments/Notes:
Specific dimensions of Good Samaritan policy data included in this public version of the data are based on a review of relevant protections granted through different variations of these laws as described in:
* Davis, C. S., & Carr, D. (2015). Legal changes to increase access to naloxone for opioid overdose
reversal in the United States. *Drug and alcohol dependence*, *157*, 112-120.
* Davis, C., & Carr, D. (2017). State legal innovations to encourage naloxone dispensing. *Journal of the American Pharmacists Association*, *57*(2), S180-S184. 