**Meta Data Name**: Social Determinants of Health (SDOH) Neighborhood Typology  
**Date Added**: March 4, 2021  
**Author**: Qinyun Lin  
**Date Last Modified**: January 3, 2024  
**Last Modified By**: Wataru Morioka

### Theme: 
Composite

### Data Location: 
You can find the variables described in this document in the CSV files [here](../full_tables).  

CSV files are organized by **year** and **spatial scale**. For example, county-level variables from 2000 will be found in C_2000.csv.  
Note: Every variable can be found in the **Latest** files.

### Data Source(s) Description:  
Variables were obtained based on the analysis in the paper: 
Kolak, Marynia, Bhatt, Jay, Park, Yoon Hong, Padron, Norma, and Molefe, Ayrin. "Quantification of Neighborhood-Level Social Determinants of Health in the Continental United States." *JAMA Network Open.* 2020;3(1):e1919928. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.19928 


### Description of Data Processing: 
The following variables were included from the source data:  
* SDOH Neighborhood Typologies

### Key Variable and Definitions:

- **Variable** -- title of variable
- **Variable ID** -- exact name of variable in datasets
- **Description** -- Short description of variable
- **Years Available** -- years for which data exists for this variable
- **Spatial Scale** -- the variable exists for these levels of spatial scale

| Variable | Variable ID in .csv | Description | Years Available | Spatial Scale |
|:---------|:--------------------|:------------|:----------------|:--------------|
| SDOH Neighborhood Typology | NeighbTyp | Categorical, one of seven neighborhood (tract-level) typologies: 1 = Rural Affordable; 2 = Suburban Affluent; 3 = Suburban Affordable; 4 = Extreme Poverty; 5 = Multilingual Working; 6 = Urban Core Opportunity; 7 = Sparse Areas | Latest | Tract |


### Data Limitations:
Some tracts are not assigned with any typologies because data are missing for factor analysis. 

### Comments/Notes:
* See Kolak, Marynia, Bhatt, Jay, Park, Yoon Hong, Padron, Norma, and Molefe, Ayrin. "Quantification of Neighborhood-Level Social Determinants of Health in the Continental United States." *JAMA Network Open.* 2020;3(1):e1919928. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.19928 for more detailed information. 
* See [SDOH Atlas](https://sdohatlas.github.io/) for visualizations.  
* There are three tracts where the county code has been changed from 113 to 102 in the year of 2015: 46113940800, 46113940500, 46113940900. The GEOIDs have been changed to new ones (46102940800, 46102940500, 46102940900) so that the data can be matched with the tract shapefile in the dataset (which is from 2018).   
* **Note on missing data:** Missing and/or unavailable data are represented as blank cells or _NA._
